Add RNA-seq UMAP example notebook (#193)
AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples: 03-rnaseq/dimension-reduction_rnaseq_02_umap.Rmd

# Using a different refine.bio dataset with this analysis?

If you'd like to adapt an example analysis to use a different dataset from [refine.bio](https://www.refine.bio/), we recommend placing the files in the `data/` directory you created and changing the filenames and paths in the notebook to match these files (we've put comments to signify where you would need to change the code).
We suggest saving plots to the `plots/` and `results/` directories, respectively, as these are automatically created by the notebook.
From here you can customize this analysis example to fit your own scientific questions and preferences. 

***

# UMAP Visualization - RNA-seq

## Install libraries

See our Getting Started page with [instructions for package installation](https://alexslemonade.github.io/refinebio-examples/01-getting-started/getting-started.html#what-you-need-to-install) for a list of the other software you will need, as well as more tips and resources.

> In this analysis, we will be using the R package [`DESeq2`](http://bioconductor.org/packages/devel/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html) [@DESeq2] for normalization, the R package [`umap`](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/umapr/versions/0.0.0.9001/topics/umap) [@UMAP] for the production of UMAP dimension reduction values and the R package , and the R package [`ggplot2`](http://r-statistics.co/Complete-Ggplot2-Tutorial-Part1-With-R-Code.html) [@ggplot2] for plotting the UMAP values.

Reviewer: These citations will also need to be updated with #194 changes.

```{r}
if (!("DESeq2" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install DESeq2
  BiocManager::install("DESeq2", update = FALSE)
}

if (!("umap" %in% installed.packages())) {
  # Install umap package
  BiocManager::install("umap", update = FALSE)
}
```

Attach the packages we need for this analysis:

```{r}
# Attach the `DESeq2` library
library(DESeq2)

# Attach the `umap` library
library(umap)

# Attach the `ggplot2` library for plotting
library(ggplot2)

# We will need this so we can use the pipe: %>%
library(magrittr)

# Set the seed so our results are reproducible:
set.seed(12345)
```

> 

Reviewer: Eventually I want to have things like `set.seed()` in some kind of glossary #117

  design = ~1 # Here we are not specifying a model -- Replace with an appropriate design variable for your analysis
)
```

## Define a minimum counts cutoff

We want to filter out the genes that have not been expressed or that have low expression counts because we want to remove any possible noise from our data before we normalize the data and create our plot.
We are going to do some pre-filtering to keep only genes with 10 or more reads total.
Note that rows represent gene data and the columns represent sample data in our dataset.

```{r}
# Define a minimum counts cutoff and filter `DESeqDataSet` object to include
# only rows that have counts above the cutoff
genes_to_keep <- rowSums(counts(dds)) >= 10
dds <- dds[genes_to_keep, ]
```

## Perform DESeq2 normalization

We are going to use the `vst()` function from the `DESeq2` package to normalize the data.
TODO: Add a note/link to section in documentation on why we use `vst()` vs `rlog()` and `normTransform()`.

```{r}
# Normalize the data in the `DESeqDataSet` object using the `vst()` function from the `DESEq2` R package
dds_norm <- vst(dds)
```

## Perform UMAP

> Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) is a dimension reduction technique proposed by McInnes, Healy, & Melville as it isdescribed in the [associated paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426) [@umap-paper].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) is a dimension reduction technique proposed by @umap-paper ([See associated paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.03426)).
```

While PCA assumes that the variation we care about has a particular distribution (normal, broadly speaking), UMAP allows more complicated distributions that it learns from the data. 
The advantage of this feature is that UMAP can do a better job separating clusters, especially when some of those clusters may be more similar to each other than others.  

In this code chunk, we are going to extract the normalized counts data from the `DESeqDataSet` object and perform UMAP on the normalized data using `umap()` from the `umap` package.
We are using the default parameters when we run the `umap::umap()` function.

> Take a look at the `Tuning UMAP` section at [this link](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/umap/vignettes/umap.html) for more on parameters that can be configured when executing `umap::umap()` [@umap-parameters].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's some [guidance about choosing parameters](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/umap/vignettes/umap.html#tuning-umap) when executing `umap::umap()` [@umap-parameters].
```

Reviewer: This citation will also need to be changed to `AuthorDate`

You can also run the following in the RStudio console to get more information on the function and its default parameters: `?umap::umap` or `?umap::umap.defaults`.

```{r}
# First we are going to retrieve the normalized data from the `DESeqDataSet` object using the `assay()` function
normalized_counts <- assay(dds_norm) %>%
  t() # We need to transpose this data in preparation for the `umap()` function

# Now let's tell R to perform UMAP on the normalized data
umap_results <- umap::umap(normalized_counts)
```

## Prepare data frame for plotting

Now that we have the results from UMAP, we need to extract the counts data from the `umap_results` object and merge the variables from the metadata that we will use for annotating our plot.

```{r}

> # We need to tell R to create a data frame with the umap counts and annotation data in preparation for plotting with `ggplot2`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# We need to tell R to create a data frame with the umap values and annotation data in preparation for plotting with `ggplot2`
```

I don't think `counts` is the right word here (but I could be wrong).

umap_plot_df <- data.frame(umap_results$layout) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("refinebio_accession_code") %>% # Let's get the rownames into a column so we can merge the annotation data

>   dplyr::inner_join(metadata, by = "refinebio_accession_code") # Let's merge the annotation data using the `refinebio_accession_code` column

Reviewer: I think there is a way to join using rownames, but honestly I find this strategy you used here easier to follow/explain.

```

## Create UMAP plot

> Now we can use the `ggplot` function to plot our normalized UMAP scores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can use the `ggplot()` function to plot our normalized UMAP scores.
```

```{r}
# Plot using `ggplot()` function

> ggplot(umap_plot_df, aes(x = X1, y = X2)) +

Reviewer: Can you stretch this code chunk out same as you did below? I think that makes it easier for users to compare the ggplot runs.

  geom_point() # This tells R that we want a scatterplot
```

Let's try adding a variable to our plot for annotation.

> In this code chunk, the variable `refinebio_treatment` is given to the `ggplot()` function as part of the goal of the experiment is to analyze the sample transcriptional responses to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this code chunk, the variable `refinebio_treatment` is given to the `ggplot()` function so we can label by androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) status.
```

```{r}
# Plot using `ggplot()` function
ggplot(
  umap_plot_df,
  aes(
    x = X1,
    y = X2,
    color = refinebio_treatment # Here we are giving `refinebio_treatment` to the color argument
  )
) +
  geom_point() # This tells R that we want a scatterplot
```

In the next code chunk, we are going to add another variable to our plot for annotation.

We'll plot using both `refinebio_treatment` and `refinebio_disease` variables for labels since they are central to the androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) based hypothesis in the [original paper](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6210624/) [@ADT-Prostate-Cancer].

```{r}
# Plot using `ggplot()` function
final_annotated_umap_plot <- ggplot(
  umap_plot_df,
  aes(
    x = X1,
    y = X2,
    color = refinebio_treatment,

>     # Here we are giving `refinebio_treatment` to the color argument

Reviewer: Here I have the same comment from before: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/refinebio-examples/pull/176#discussion_r474652655

Reviewer: My guess is you had worked on this before we got to that point on the PCA notebook. 😃

    shape = refinebio_disease # Here we are giving `refinebio_disease` to the shape argument
  )
) +
  geom_point() # This tells R that we want a scatterplot

# Display the plot that we saved above
final_annotated_umap_plot
```

> The plot above is more informative than the first plot we created but is still not as informative as one may home as there are no clear clusters represented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plot above is more informative than the first plot we created but is still not as informative as one may home as there are no clear clusters represented.
```
"as one may home"? 😸 Honestly you can probably just delete this sentence anyway, not sure it adds much info.

Although it does appear that majority of the pre-ADT and post-ADT appear to cluster together, there are still questions remaining as we look at outliers.

### Interpretation of UMAP plot and results

> 1. Note that the coordinates of UMAP output for any given cell can change dramatically depending on parameters, and even run to run with the same parameters. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Note that the coordinates of UMAP output for any given cell can change dramatically depending on parameters, and even run to run with the same parameters (Also why setting the seed is important). 
```

This means that you should not rely too heavily on the exact values of UMAP's output. 

>   - One particular limitation of UMAP is that while observed clusters have some meaning, the distance *between* clusters usually does not (nor does cluster density). The fact that two clusters are near each other should NOT be interpreted to mean that they are more related to each other than to more distant clusters. (There is some disagreement about whether UMAP distances have more meaning, but it is also probably safer to assume they don't.)

Reviewer: I do have a question about whether we need to cite ourselves from training-modules? Not sure how this works.

Author: I attempted to do this, but not sure I _fully_ followed the citation guidelines? Wasn't completely sure who the author should be (`CCDL 2020` as in the notebook or those who I can see contributed in Git history).

Reviewer: This is a tricky instance. I think what you have now is fine.

2. Playing with the parameters so you can fine-tune them is a good way to give you more information about a particular analysis as well as the data itself.
Feel free to try playing with the parameters on your own in the code chunks above!
   
In summary, a good rule of thumb to remember is: if the results of an analysis can be completely changed by changing its parameters, you should be very cautious when it comes to the conclusions you draw from it as well as having good rationale for the parameters you choose.

## Save annotated UMAP plot as a PNG

You can easily switch this to save to a JPEG or TIFF by changing the file name within the `ggsave()` function to the respective file suffix.

```{r}
# Save plot using `ggsave()` function
ggsave(file.path(plots_dir, "SRP133573_umap_plot.png"), # Replace with name relevant your plotted data
  plot = final_annotated_umap_plot
)
```

# Resources for further learning

- [More on UMAP and its parameters](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/umap/vignettes/umap.html) [@umap-parameters]

> - [Guidelines on choosing dimension reduction methods](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006907&type=printable) [@dimension-reduction-guidelines]  

Reviewer: These citations need to be updated too.

---
title: "UMAP Visualization - RNA-seq"
author: "CCDL for ALSF"
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%B %Y')`"
output:   
  html_notebook:
    toc: true
    toc_float: true
    number_sections: true
---

> # Purpose of this analysis:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Purpose of this analysis
```

```

Although it does appear that majority of the pre-ADT and post-ADT appear to cluster together, there are still questions remaining as we look at outliers.

### Interpretation of UMAP plot and results

1. Note that the coordinates of UMAP output for any given cell can change dramatically depending on parameters, and even run to run with the same parameters  (Also why setting the seed is important). 
This means that you should not rely too heavily on the exact values of UMAP's output. 

  - One particular limitation of UMAP is that while observed clusters have some meaning, the distance *between* clusters usually does not (nor does cluster density). The fact that two clusters are near each other should NOT be interpreted to mean that they are more related to each other than to more distant clusters. (There is some disagreement about whether UMAP distances have more meaning, but it is also probably safer to assume they don't.)

2. Playing with the parameters so you can fine-tune them is a good way to give you more information about a particular analysis as well as the data itself.
Feel free to try playing with the parameters on your own in the code chunks above!
   

> In summary, a good rule of thumb to remember is: if the results of an analysis can be completely changed by changing its parameters, you should be very cautious when it comes to the conclusions you draw from it as well as having good rationale for the parameters you choose [@CCDL2020].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, a good rule of thumb to remember is: if the results of an analysis can be completely changed by changing its parameters, you should be very cautious when it comes to the conclusions you draw from it as well as having good rationale for the parameters you choose (_adapted from @CCDL2020 training materials_).
```

## Save annotated UMAP plot as a PNG

You can easily switch this to save to a JPEG or TIFF by changing the file name within the `ggsave()` function to the respective file suffix.

```{r}
# Save plot using `ggsave()` function
ggsave(file.path(plots_dir, "SRP133573_umap_plot.png"), # Replace with name relevant your plotted data
  plot = final_annotated_umap_plot
)
```

# Resources for further learning

- [More on UMAP and its parameters](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/umap/vignettes/umap.html) [@umap-vignette]
- [Guidelines on choosing dimension reduction methods](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article/file?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006907&type=printable) [@Nguyen2019]  
- [A nice explanation and comparison of many different dimensionality reduction techniques that you may encounter](https://rpubs.com/Saskia/520216) [@Freytag2019]

> # Print session info:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Print session info
```
